# Model Methods

> [!NOTE]
> Cloesce takes inspiration from RPC frameworks when generating backend and client code, but communicates entirely over HTTP.

Models do not define just the source, structure, and infrastructure of your data, but also the API endpoints to operate on that data. 

In this section, we will explore how to define methods on Models that are exposed as API endpoints, CRUD methods generated by Cloesce, and the runtime validation that occurs when these methods are invoked.

## Static and Instance Methods

> [!WARNING]
> GET methods in v0.3.0 do not support complex types as parameters (such as other Models, arrays, etc). 
> Only primitive types like `string`, `int`, `double`, `bool` are supported. This limitation will be lifted in future releases.

A Model in Cloesce may have both "static" and "instance" methods.

A static method exists on the namespace of the Model class itself and can be called without hydrating the Model.

An instance method exists on an actual instance of the Model and can access the fields of that instance via `self`. When an instance method is called, Cloesce will automatically hydrate the Model instance with the appropriate data before invoking the method. Each instance method may specify a Data Source to how `self` should be hydrated.

```cloesce
[use db]
model User {
    primary {
        id: int
    }

    name: string
    
    nav (Dog::ownerId) {
        dogs
    }
}

api User {
    get echo() -> string
    get myDogs(self) -> Array<Dog>
    get selfWithoutDogs([source NoDogs] self) -> User

    post updateName(self, newName: string) -> void
}

source NoDogs for User {
    include { }
}
```

After compilation, all methods of the `User` Model will be exposed as API endpoints, returning HTTP `501` (Not Implemented) until they are implemented on the Workers side.

An example implementation of the `User` Model methods in TypeScript might look like this:

```typescript
import * as Cloesce from "@cloesce/backend";

class UserApi extends Cloesce.User.Api {
    echo(input: string): HttpResult<string> {
        if (isBadWord(input)) {
            return HttpResult.fail(400, "I'm not saying that!");
        }

        return HttpResult.ok(200, `Echo: ${input}`);
    }

    myDogs(self: Cloesce.User.Self): Dog[] {
        // Since this method was hydrated with the default Data Source, 
        // `self` includes the `dogs` Navigation Field.
        return self.dogs;
    }

    selfWithoutDogs(self: Cloesce.User.Self): User {
        // Since this method was hydrated with the `NoDogs` Data Source,
        // `self` does not include the `dogs` Navigation Field.
        return self;
    }

    async updateName(self: Cloesce.User.Self,newName: string): Promise<void> {
        await Cloesce.User.save({ ...self, name: newName });
    }
}
```

The generated client API will have fully typed methods to invoke these endpoints as if they were Object Oriented methods on the class `User`.

## CRUD Methods

> [!IMPORTANT]
> Delete is not yet supported as a generated CRUD method in v0.3.0, but it is planned for a future release.

> [!NOTE]
> R2 does not support CRUD methods for streaming the object body, only the metadata.

When creating Models, you will find yourself writing the same CRUD (Create, Read, Update, Delete) boilerplate. To save this effort, Cloesce is capable of generating implementations for CRUD methods without any extra work. These methods are exposed as API endpoints. Internally, they simply run the [Cloesce ORM](./ch2-6-cloesce-orm.md) operations.

```cloesce
[use db]
[use get, save, list]
model User {
    primary {
        id: int
    } 
}
```

Now, the client will have access to the methods `User.$get`, `User.$save`, and `User.$list` for free, which will call the corresponding API endpoints to perform those operations. The `$get` method takes in the primary key(s) of the Model to fetch a single instance, while the `$list` method takes in pagination parameters to fetch multiple instances.

By default, these methods use the default Data Source for the Model. However, each CRUD method accepts a Data Source as a parameter, allowing you to choose which Data Source to use when invoking the method. This provides flexibility in how much data is fetched when performing CRUD operations.

To hide a Data Source from the client CRUD methods, simply mark the Data Source as `internal`:

```cloesce
internal source Internal for User {
    include {
        dogs
    }
}
```

## Runtime Validation

When a Model method is invoked via an API call, the Cloesce runtime automatically performs validation on the input parameters and the return value based on what it has extracted from the Model definition during compilation. This ensures that the data being passed to and from the method adheres to the expected types and constraints defined in the Model.

There are many valid types for method parameters in Cloesce, such as:

| Type | Description |
|------|-------------|
| `string` | String values |
| `double` | Floating-point numbers |
| `int` | Integer values |
| `bool` | Boolean values (true/false) |
| `date` | Date and time values |
| `blob` | Binary data |
| `DataSource<T>` | Any data source for Model type `T` |
| `json` | JSON data of unknown structure |
| `Partial<T>` | Partial version of Model type `T` where anything can be missing |
| Plain Old Objects | Objects with properties of supported types |
| Model types | Custom Models (e.g., `User`, `Post`) |
| `Array<T>` | Arrays of any supported type (e.g., `Array<string>`, `Array<User>`) |
| `Option<T>` | Nullable versions of any type |
| `stream` | Stream of data |

## Plain Old Objects

> [!NOTE]
> Plain old objects can only consist of serializable properties supported by Cloesce. They cannot contain any streams.

Cloesce supports the use of Plain Old Objects (POOs) as method parameters and return types. A POO is an object with properties that are of supported types. This allows developers to return or accept complex data structures without needing to define a full Model for them.

```cloesce
poo Profile {
    bio: string
    age: int
    interests: Array<string>
}

model User {
    // ...
}

api User {
    get profile(self) -> Profile
    post updateProfile(self, profile: Profile) -> void
}
```

## Partial

Cloesce provides a special utility type called `Partial<T>`, which allows for the creation of objects where all properties of type `T` are optional, and this optionality is applied recursively to nested objects. This is particularly useful for update operations where you may only want to provide a subset of the properties of a Model.

## Stream Input and Output

Cloesce supports streaming data both as input parameters and return values in Model methods. This is particularly useful for handling large files or data streams without loading everything into memory at once. Streams can be hinted to Cloesce using the `stream` type.

If a method parameter is of type `stream`, no other validation is performed on the input data. Additionally, no other parameters are allowed in the method signature when using a stream input (aside from injected dependencies, which are discussed later).

When a method returns a `stream`, Cloesce will return a plain `Response` on the client side, allowing for efficient streaming of data back to the client.

For example, to return a R2 object's body as a stream, you can define a method like this:

```cloesce
model MediaFile {
    primary {
        id: int
    }

    r2(myBucket, "media/{id}.png") {
        file
    }
}

api MediaFile {
    post uploadFile(self, wrangler: env, file: stream) -> void
    get downloadFile(self) -> stream
}
```

```typescript
import * as Cloesce from "@cloesce/backend";

class MediaFileApi extends Cloesce.MediaFile.Api {
    async uploadFile(self: Cloesce.MediaFile.Self, wrangler: Cloesce.Env, file: CfReadableStream): Promise<void> {
        const key = Cloesce.Weather.KeyFormat.file(self.id);
        await wrangler.myBucket.put(key, file);
     }

    downloadFile(self: Cloesce.MediaFile.Self): HttpResult<CfReadableStream> {
        if (!self.file) {
            return HttpResult.fail(404, "File not found.");
        }

        // Body is never loaded into memory, just streamed!
        return HttpResult.ok(self.file.body);
     }
}
```



