# Custom Data Sources

It is likely that the Default Data Source generated by Cloesce will not fit all of your needs for data retrieval. For example, you may want to fetch a `Person` without their associated `Dog`, or fetch an `Profile` without their `avatar` R2 field.

Cloesce allows you to define custom Data Source for any Model, which can include any combination of KV, R2, and Navigation Fields, in addition to custom SQL queries for D1 backed Models.

## Defining a Data Source

> [!NOTE]
> By default, any scalar property (i.e., any D1 standard column) will be included by all Data Sources.

Data Sources can be defined with a `source` block. In inner `include` block, you can specify all fields to include in that Data Source, including R2, KV and Navigation Fields.

```cloesce
source WithDogsOwnersDogs for Person {
    include {
        dogs {
            owner {
                dogs {
                    // ... could keep going!
                }
            }
        }
    }
}
```

### Overriding the Default Data Source

The Default Data Source for a Model can be overridden by giving a `source` block the name `Default`. This allows you to specify exactly what fields should be included whenever that Model is fetched, without having to specify the Data Source by name.

```cloesce
// Override the default to be empty
source Default for Person {
    include {}
}
```

## Get Method

Each time Cloesce needs to hydrate an instance of a D1 backed Model, it requires a Data Source with a `get` method defined. 

If you do not define a `get` method, Cloesce will use the Default Data Source, which generates a `get` method that queries by primary key:

```cloesce
source Default for Person {
    include {}

    sql get([instance] id: int) {
        "
        SELECT * FROM Person WHERE id = $id
        "
    }
}
```

The above code will be generated by default for any D1 backed Model, but can be overriden by defining a Data Source called `Default`, or making a custom data source such as:


```cloesce
source ByName for Person {
    include {}

    sql get([instance] name: string) {
        "
        SELECT * FROM Person WHERE name = $name
        "
    }
}
```

### `instance` tag

When Cloesce returns a Model to the client, the client receives a fully instantiated instance of that Model with methods that invoke the backend API.

Because the client has all necessary data to identify that instance (e.g. the primary key), it is not always necessary to manually attach identifying parameters to each API method.

To tell Cloesce that a parameter is already available on the client instance (i.e. it is a field of the Model), you can use the `instance` tag in your `get` method parameters. This allows you to omit that parameter when calling the API method on the client, and Cloesce will automatically pull it from the instance data and pass it to the backend.

```cloesce
source ByName for Person {
    include {}

    sql get([instance] name: string) {
        "
        SELECT * FROM Person WHERE name = $name
        "
    }
}
```

If `instance` were to be omitted in the example above, the generated API method would require a `name` parameter to be passed in, even though the client instance already has that data available.

## List Method

While `get` is used during hydration, the `list` method is used only in the generated CRUD `list` endpoint for that Model. If you do not define a `list` method, Cloesce will generate one for you which performs seek pagination based on the primary key:

```cloesce
source Default for Person {
    include {}

    sql list(last_id: int, limit: int) {
        "
        SELECT * FROM Person WHERE id > $last_id ORDER BY id ASC LIMIT $limit
        "
    }
}
```

Custom `list` methods can be defined as well:

```cloesce
source ByName for Person {
    include {}

    sql list(last_name: string, limit: int) {
        "
        SELECT * FROM Person WHERE name > $last_name ORDER BY name ASC LIMIT $limit
        "
    }
}
```

## `include` Expansion

Each Data Source must define an `include` block, even if that block is empty. The `include` block specifies all fields to be included when that Data Source is used, and is required for Cloesce to know how to hydrate the instance.

When hydrating an instance of a Model, Cloesce converts the `include` block (called an include tree) into a SQL query with the necessary joins to retrieve all specified fields in as few queries as possible.

The transpiled SQL query can be used within a Data Source's `get` or `list` method, allowing you to write custom data retrieval logic while still leveraging the power of Cloesce's include trees to handle complex relationships between Models.

For example:

```cloesce
source WithDogsOwnersDogs for Person {
    include {
        dogs {
            owner {
                dogs {}
            }
        }
    }

    sql get([instance] id: int) {
        "
        WITH included AS ($include)
        SELECT * from included WHERE id = $id
        "
    }

    sql list(owner_id: int, limit: int) {
        "
        WITH included AS ($include)
        SELECT * from included WHERE [dogs.owner_id] = $owner_id LIMIT $limit
        "
    }
}
```

See more information on how `$include` is transpiled in the [ORM Reference](ch7-0-orm-reference.md).

## Internal Data Source

A Data Source may have no use on the client, and only be used internally by Cloesce or invoked by the developer using the [Cloesce ORM](ch7-0-orm-reference.md). In this case, the Data Source can be marked as `internal`, which will prevent Cloesce from generating a client API method for that Data Source.

```cloesce
[internal]
source InternalOnly for Person {
    // ...
}
```