Two scenarios can occur in a D1 to D1 relationship:
1. Both models are in the same database (e.g., `ModelA` and `ModelB` are both in `DbA`)
2. The models are in different databases (e.g., `ModelA` is in `DbA` and `ModelB` is in `DbB`)

In either case, the relationship can be `one` or `many`. Additionally, any number of relationships can exist on any given model. For example, `ModelA` could have a `one` relationship to `ModelB`, and a `many` relationship to `ModelC`.

* If a relationship is `1:1` but the resulting `JOIN` yields multiple rows, the runtime will choose the first row and ignore the rest.

# D1 Notes

In D1, when both models are in the same database, for either `one` or `many` relationships, the Query Planner will generate a single query to fetch the related models by `JOIN`ing the two tables together.

This means that any relationships that span the same database can be retrieved in one query, under a single transaction (as opposed to multiple queries requiring waiting for the first query to finish before executing the second query).

When relationships span different databases, the Query Planner will generate a query plan that may span multiple transactions. This is because the runtime cannot execute a single query across multiple databases.

Even though the primary key parameters are always supplied in the `get` operation, we cannot immediately resolve the relationships in a single query even if they depend only on the primary key of the model being queried. This is because we must first guarantee that the base model exists before we can query for its relationships. If the base model does not exist, the runtime should halt the query and return an error.

# Appendix

- [get](./get.md)
- [list](./list.md)