# v0.1.0 (MVP) Milestones

## v0.0.1

### Milestone

Capability to take a basic TypeScript model and convert it to a Sqlite database schema, TypeScript Workers backend, Client API and Wrangler setup. Determine initial project scaffold.

#### Schema Extractor

- Initial CIDL format
- Explicitly annotated Primary Keys
- CLI

#### D1

- Sqlite table generation
- Primary keys
- null, real, integer, blob, text

#### Workers

- Instantiated Model Methods
- Static Model Methods
- Explicit HTTP Response return type

#### Client API

- Instantiated and static Model method calling
- Serialize HTTP Response type
- Result monad

## v0.0.2

### Milestone

Expand on the types a Workers method can return, adding arrays, models, basic types.
Introduce explicitly decorated Model foreign keys, navigation properties, and data sources.

#### Schema Extractor

- Model return types
- Array return types
- Basic return types
- Explicit Foreign keys
- Navigation properties
- Data sources

#### D1

- Foreign Keys

#### Workers

- Api endpoints can return models, arrays
- Data sources + nav props
- Fix GET endpoints (params can't be in body)

#### Client API

- Serialize models, arrays
- Data sources
- Fix GET endpoints (params can't be in body)

## v0.0.3

### Milestone

- Add "Plain Old \<Language\> Objects" support, allowing developers to return any type that can be easily serialized on the frontend.

- Introduce a dependency injection container, allowing both cloudflare environment variables and user defined variables can be put into the map and injected into methods.

- Introduce middleware, allowing some global function to modify the DI container with user variables, and short circuit the router process on some user defined exit.

- Create a testing suite that can support the continous development of Cloesce.

- Standardize cloesce errors to a useful form for end users

- Enhance the nullability grammar to allow any value to be null

## v0.0.4

### Milestone

- Allow for a user defined authentication scheme by extending middleware to a global scope, model scope, and model method scope. Developers should be able to write their own authentication logic a global scope, and easily use role based permissions for models, methods, and data sources.

- The client api should be easily extendable to use the backend authentication scheme through some frontend middleware method, modifying outgoing requests.

- Move the `cloesce` backend TypeScript code to a Web Assembly binary compiled from Rust

- Create a dead simple ORM binary in Rust capable of automating CRUD operations, being: Get, List, Post, Patch, Delete. Allow the user side to call this via the WASM binary

- Create CRUD decorators which are capable of generating generic CRUD methods using the ORM

- Allow multiple database use

## v0.0.5

### Milestone

(Still TBD)

Introduce Durable Object dependencies, which act as singleton injectable instances for a Models methods. Classes annotate with `@DO` will assume all attributes are to be serialized and saved to Cloudflare KV. Methods on a DO are either internal or external, with internal only being called by a model, and external having a generated client API. Workers will call a Durable Object through a generated API, identical to the class

## v0.0.6

### Milestone

(Still TBD)

Add R2 support, allowing a model to define an R2 bucket and link to it's R2 ID. Support CRUD generation for R2.
